Analysis of Traffic Crashes in Chicago

Traffic accidents pose a significant public health and safety concern. The severity of traffic accidents can vary widely, resulting in injuries ranging from minor to fatal. Understanding the factors that contribute to accident severity is crucial for developing effective prevention strategies. This analysis focuses on identifying factors associated with severe injuries and high damages in traffic accidents across Chicago. To this extent, the project aims to answer the following research questions:

● When and where in Chicago are crashes more likely to occur?
● What factors affect the severity of injury in a traffic accident in Chicago?
● What factors affect the Damages incurred in an accident in Chicago?

Traffic crash reports logged by the Chicago Police Department are examined to answer these questions. The data is accessible through the Chicago Data Portal (https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Traffic-Crashes-Crashes/85ca-t3if/about_data), and it contains noteworthy information about each accident, like the time of the crash, the location of the crash, the primary cause of the accident, lighting conditions at the site, weather conditions at the site, damages incurred in dollars, number of injuries, severity of injury, etc. These characteristics make it feasible for a well-developed model to address the research questions. This project employs a Distributed Multinomial Regression model to understand and rank the most influential factors affecting damages incurred and severity of injuries in traffic accidents. The model is complemented by dimensionality reduction methods like Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and data transformation methods like One Hot Encoding. The project also employs Kernel Density Estimation to plot accident-prone hotspots across Chicago over different periods of time. The application of these methods brought forth several key observations. Firstly, a substantial number of traffic accidents occur in the downtown area of Chicago, especially in River North. Most of the accidents in downtown Chicago seem to occur at road intersections. The number of crashes appears to decrease during Fall and Winter and then increase during Spring and Summer. The model suggests that the severity of the injury is primarily affected by the first crash type (involving a train, pedestrians, cyclists, or overturned vehicle) and the primary cause of the accident (physical condition of the driver, improper backing). Furthermore, damages incurred in an accident are primarily affected by the first crash type (pedestrian, animal, fixed object), traffic way type (accident at a parking lot), and primary cause of the accident (improper backing, DUI).

This analysis contains two main .rmd files. The traffic_crash_EDA.rmd file details the initial analysis of the crash data, while the traffic_crash_model.rmd file details the models constructed based on the initial analysis.
